---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: ! "I don't know if I'm autistic"
author:
  display_name: chad
tags:
- personal
- mental health
---

Today I'm doing an experiment into a different type of blogging. I always think of a price I want to write but then I always struggle to actually write it down, you know once I'm sat hand to keyboard. So today I'm trying something a bit different and I'm trying to dictate this blog post to my computer which doesn't feel weird at all.

Today I wanna talk about autism.

<!--more-->

Really I wanna talk about myself and the thoughts and feelings and “journey” I'm going on. I've blogged a while ago about my issues with sound, that I have really bad panic attacks when I'm exposed to certain types of sound. You could call it sensory overload but it's not really about volume it's more about information. So it's not about whether I'm in a crowded room it's about whether I'm in a quiet room but with two people speaking at the same time.

I know I already have anxiety but the sound thing, and some other things, I haven't been able to sort out with therapy. I've had CBT for a few years now and it has been really helpful. It's helped a lot with sorting out my anxiety, trying to figure out what is anxiety and what's something else, it's helped me a lot with my depression and with the self harming. However we haven't been able to really work on my issues with sound, we tried some things but they didn't work out. So of course I started thinking is there something else going on in my brain.

Right now there are two things stopping me from self diagnosing as autistic well three things. The first and probably the safest is very fair of me having an assessment and not being autistic and me just being weird. The other two things are a bit more important. The first thing is my lack of special interest. Now I know that autism is a spectrum for lack of a better word and no to people with autism are the same. The issue is that all the diagnostic tools and quizzes and guidance that I find does talk about having a special interest. It does seem to be an important characteristic of somebody if you want to be diagnosed that you have an obsessional interest in something, probably numbers of something, but I don't really have anything like that. A bit of me does wonder if it's video games he does wonder, it's not that I am obsessed with numbers or data in video games but they are pretty much my life. Most the music I listen to is either game soundtracks or artists that I discovered through games, I've got two game tattoos and will have more soon, I have artwork, I have T-shirts, I have stickers ,everything nearly everything I own
is about a video game of some kind. But gaming is a pretty common hobby so what is the difference between it being a hobby and being special interest I'm not convinced.

The second issue is thoughts around empathy. So when I went to the GP and said therapy isn't working can we try something else their response was have you tried therapy. So they referred me to I a PT and I had an assessment with them. I talked about everything that was going on with me even stuff that I that I am aware of and have managed to some extent. Some way through this though I did mention that I think I might be autistic. The response of the assessor was to say that everything sounds like anxiety and then she asked me what I have referred to as the autism question. She asked me about whether I can read emotions in faces. I know this to be an autism question because it shows up on all those quizzes I talked about. I have empathy, I've been told off for having too much empathy, I struggle to disengage emotionally from situations, I struggle to emotionally distance myself from people. So really I think I have excess empathy. And this excess empathy is one of the reasons I've never really considered autism before, but actually I do have a lot of autistic friends and I wouldn't say they don't have empathy. I did read a thread on Twitter awhile ago that mentioned that maybe excess empathy is a diagnostic thing. So I don't know can I read emotions in faces? I think sometimes I over read emotions in phases in that I attributed motions to people that they don't have and then they look at me funny.

I'm on the waiting list for an assessment now but with everything that's going on that's not gonna happen for a long time. In addition the current crisis is making it really hard for me to tell what's going on in my head, because most the stuff going on in my head is extreme anxiety related to not do you wanna go outside very often. My anxiety is extreme, and a lot of my reactions to it are new and frightening. I have had what I probably would've considered to be meltdowns, I've had issues with my speech, I stutter a lot and I've never started before I find it difficult to speak sometimes. No I know being non-verbal is or can be an autism thing but is this an autism thing or is it an extreme anxiety thing. What is the difference? I don't know and I don't know how to find out either. It's irritating that we look down on people yourself diagnose don't require you to self diagnose before you can ask for a medical diagnosis of anything. If I'm not sure how am I going to convince a doctor? The only reason they sent me for the assessment is because IAPT said they can't do anything for me. Apparently CBT is literally all that there is and if you can't do CBT then sucks to be you. This is going to turn into a rant and I'm unsure how this experiment speaking helps write people don't talk like they write but it's good to get stuff out there. I don't know what the point of this is, if you autistic and this resonates with you or you read this and go “no mate it's just anxiety” then get in touch either way because I don't know how to move on with this circular thinking of it definitely autism and it definitely isn't.
